Genetic Algorithm Deep Dive
===========================

*The following are relevant excerpts from the manuscript presenting this work.*

A classification problem can be expressed as the problem of learning a function f: X onto y. A binary classification problem is a problem where y is binary, 0 or 1. Several learning algorithms have been developed to this end by researchers in mathematical statistics and more recently machine learning (Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006) (Haykin, 1998). The problem is further described by a dataset {d1, … dn} of training data points di = (Xi, yi) ε X * y. A learning algorithm typically has associated hyper parameters λ ε which alter the behaviour of the learning algorithm. The task of machine learning typically entails the optimisation of these hyper parameters. Several approaches to efficient and effective hyperparameter optimisation have been proposed (Komer, Bergstra and Eliasmith, 2014).

Given a set of learning algorithms A and a limited dataset D = {(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)}, the objective of model selection is to identify the algorithm A∗ ∈ A that achieves optimal generalization performance. Generalization performance is assessed by splitting D into disjoint training and validation sets D(i)_train and D(i)_valid. The learning functions are constructed using A∗ on D(i)_train, and their predictive performance is then evaluated on D(i)_valid. This frames the model selection problem as follows:

*(Equation 1)*

𝐴∗ = arg min (𝐴∈𝒜𝑘) ∑ 𝑖 𝐿(𝐴, 𝐷(𝑖)train, 𝐷(𝑖)valid)

where L(A, D(i)_train, D(i)_valid) represents the loss (e.g., misclassification rate) attained by A when trained on D(i)_train and assessed on D(i)_valid (Thornton et al., 2013). Performance can be further evaluated by partitioning data into k equally sized folds and the learning algorithm fitted to k-1 folds and evaluated on the held-out set.

The choice of learning algorithm, hyperparameter and feature set can be viewed as a hyperparameter set to be optimised for itself (Komer, Bergstra and Eliasmith, 2014). This set may then be optimised for using known generally available optimisation methods such as Bayesian hyperparameter optimisation (Komer, Bergstra and Eliasmith, 2014) and genetic algorithms.

Genetic Algorithm and Ensemble Classifier
-----------------------------------------

In order to address the optimisation problem in (Equation 1) a method inspired by recent applied machine learning in medicine was developed (Agius et al., 2020), note well feature engineering methods utilised were similarly heavily inspired by those found in that manuscript. The precise predictive problem addressed by those method is different however the general problem is very similar across available data sources, types of features, numbers of samples and others. This method in its referential form entails a genetic algorithm to search for the optimal ensemble of machine learning classifiers for a binary outcome. In the method developed and extended here it entails a grid search over genetic algorithm hyperparameters and feature space and feature transformations for the optimal ensemble of machine learning classifiers for a binary outcome. Ensemble weighting, additional base learning algorithms, early stopping, model recycling, neural architecture search and more.

A genetic algorithm is an optimization technique inspired by the process of natural selection. It's used in machine learning to find optimal solutions to complex problems by mimicking the evolutionary process. It starts with a population of potential solutions represented as individuals. Through iterations, individuals are selected, recombined, and mutated to create new generations. The selection is based on the fitness of individuals, which measures their quality in solving the problem. Over time, this process tends to improve the overall fitness of the population, leading to solutions that are better adapted to the problem at hand.

The ensemble method described in (Agius et al., 2020) (Nickolls et al., 2008) was first replicated in software. An ensemble modelling approach combines predictions from multiple independent classifiers. The authors cite (Hansen and Salamon, 1990) (Perrone and Cooper,1995) arguing that ensemble methods can reduce overfitting and that multiple independent uncorrelated predictors can reduce the error. This method was designed to consider greatly more variables than are typically found in the medical diagnosis prediction literature. It was then adapted largely to increase the available configuration and explore a greater algorithm, feature and transformation hyperparameter space. Several developments are a result of reengineering to deploy the algorithm in a resource constrained environment. The hyperparameter configuration of the genetic algorithm and feature space were not optimised for, however in principle and given sufficient compute resource, they could be optimised with Bayesian hyperparameter (Komer, Bergstra and Eliasmith, 2014) optimisation as in Ma.

The following is a description of the method as it is finally implemented for this project. All data transformations and feature space segmenting methods previously described for Ma were used to form a grid of datasets for consideration for the primary dataset’s Da and Db. A random sub sample of the possible grids was selected to reduce compute time. Candidate base learners from Scikit-learn were implemented as in CLL-TIM. Hyperparameter spaces were expanded. An additional base learner of a binary classifier implemented in Pytorch was developed and included. This base learner implements rudimentary aspects of neural architecture search (Elsken, Metzen and Hutter, 2019) by exposing elementary artificial neural network architecture hyperparameters in the search space. This is an improvement on the Scikit-learn multilayer perceptron classifier implemented in CLL-TIM as it is accelerated by CUDA (Nickolls et al., 2008) and is greatly more extensible.

The genetic algorithm's process begins with creating a population through random selection from a pool of base learners. Each base learner comprises a specific learning algorithm along with its corresponding hyperparameter space. Initializing a base learner involves training the learning algorithm with a randomized arrangement of hyperparameters on a training dataset. Prior to this, a feature reduction technique is applied to the dataset. The trained model is then utilized to assess its performance on a test dataset, which is shortened by the feature selection process. Once created, the base learner includes the learning algorithm, a subset of features, relevant metrics, an evaluation score (AUC), and a prediction vector for the test dataset.

The pool of base learners is invoked to construct ensembles ranging from two to the maximum specified ensemble size. To introduce a skew towards smaller ensembles, a skew normal distribution function is applied. The ensembles generated using this method serve as individuals within the genetic algorithm. These individuals are defined by the chromosomes of the individual base learners. The fitness of each ensemble is determined by its performance on the test set, as assessed by the AUC metric. Notably, no measures were taken to implement ensemble diversity weighting. However, a hyperparameter for ensemble weighting offers three potential weighting options. The first is no weighting, each base learner in the ensemble’s prediction is collapsed in a matrix and transformed into a binary akin to applying a sigmoid to the mean. The second, differential evolution (Virtanen et al., 2020) is used to find the weights for each base learner that maximise AUC on the training set. Far fewer iterations for this algorithm than are normally used to reduce compute time. Differential evolution weighted ensemble individuals then have their AUC attribute set to the weighted ensemble score. The third entails a similar optimisation problem however an artificial neural network implemented in Pytorch is used to learn the optimal ensemble weighting. Artificial neural network weighted ensemble individuals then have their AUC attribute set to the weighted ensemble score.

Individuals are generated to fill a population of size 96. These individuals then undergo evaluation whereby they are measured on their classification performance, Matthews’s correlation coefficient was used to evaluate performance on the test set, this is the individual’s fitness. Parents are selected by tournament selection of the size of a hyperparameter from these individuals and 2-point crossover is applied. Mutation of the probability given in a hyperparameter of ensembles occurs when one base learner is swapped out for a newly randomly generated one. Fitness of the offspring is recalculated. This cycle is repeated for a maximum of 128 generations. Early stopping defined by a failure to improve on the maximum MCC score reached after five cycles was implemented. A full description and illustration of this process is available in (Agius et al., 2020) supplementary 17). The genetic algorithm was implemented with DEAP Python library (Fortin et al., 2012).